---
date: 2009-06-03T18:41:15Z
categories:
- digital humanities
- research
title: Digital History as a Research Methodology
url: /2009/06/03/digital-history-methodology/
wordpress_id: 343
---

In the process of researching and writing my thesis I turned to the  emerging methodology of digital history, and would like to document here  the process of doing digital work and the future possibilities for  digital history.  <em>Framing Red Power</em> sought to utilize digital  technology to investigate and analyze the interaction between media and  politics by focusing on the Trail of Broken Treaties as a lens to  understand the complex connections between political movements and mass  media.  The American Indian Movement was well-known for its propensity  for grabbing headlines.  While the occupation of Wounded Knee in 1973 is  highly significant and symbolic, it has received substantial attention  from scholars.  The Trail of Broken Treaties, on the other hand, was  AIM’s first sustained media coverage of the sort they wanted.  The type  of language and rhetoric deployed by the media and by AIM, the narrative  frameworks, and public discourse both shaped and were shaped by the  Trail of Broken Treaties and the context of the early 1970s.  At its  core,  my thesis attempted to shed light on the broader interaction  between media and politics, and how this complex relationship shapes  political culture and ideology.

The advent of digital technologies is changing and challenging the  ways historians practice their craft.  The way we collect, present, and  store information has changed rapidly in the last twenty years.  Digital  history is several things: a methodology meant to aid the traditional  art and practice of historians; the use of digital tools to gain insight  into information that cannot be done with a legal pad and pen, which  allows historians to disseminate and present their information in new  ways; and reach wide audiences through nearly ubiquitous digital  exposure.  The digital medium is a versatile atmosphere for historians  that allows the presentation of historical data in several formats  (images, sound, moving pictres) and manipulated in dynamic ways (textual  analysis, text mining, GIS maps).  The power of digital tools allows  historians to pose new questions to historical problems.  The goal is  not simply an archive of material that drives no argument; historians  must interpret and analyze material, not simply digitize sources and  place them online.  Nor is the goal cliometrics 2.0 or to augment the  theory-driven social sciences, but to abide by the historian’s  commitment to complexity and nuance while utilizing digital technologies  to aide that task.

Digital history is both a new practice and an old art in two ways.   First, the process of becoming an historian has shifted.  The skepticism  of digital history is understandable because the profession has  developed its own hierarchy–a clear path for how we “do history.”  Dan  Cohen, a key scholar in digital humanities, warns that digital  historians
<blockquote>need to recognize that the digital humanities represent a  scary, rule-breaking, swashbuckling movement for many historians and  other scholars.  We must remember that these scholars have had–for  generations and still in today’s graduate schools–a very clear path for  how they do their work, publish, and get rewarded.  Visit archive; do  careful reading; find examples in documents; conceptualize and analyze;  write monograph; get tenure.  We threaten all of this.  For every time  we focus on text mining and pattern recognition, traditionalists can  point to the successes of close reading–on the power of a single word.   We propose new methods of research when the old ones don’t seem broken.</blockquote>
Second, how historians do their work has changed.  Rather than spend  hours in an archive, a Google search or a visit to the Library of  Congress’s American Memory website puts a a wealth of information  seconds away.

Given the nearly unending limitations of digital space that allows  for an incomprehensible amount of information on the Internet, any foray  into digital history necessarily begins with a clear outline to guide  the research or risk an unending project that merely seeks to digitize  primary sources.  The research question, like any piece of scholarship,  required boundaries and a clear purpose.  The design process entails  several important considerations for digital historians: the purpose of a  research project, the tools that will be offered, the argument that  drives the research, the technologies that are available, and the  limitations placed on available sources factor into digital  scholarship.  I made the choice to limit my project to national news  sources for two reasons.  One, editorial and time constrains forced me  to make choices about what would be included in my analysis.  Second,  national media had wide audiences that responded in different ways.  My  original plan was to analyze major newspapers only and focus on the  national (New York Times and Washington Post), regional (Minneapolis  Tribune and Chicago Tribune), and local (Sioux Falls Argus Leader and  the Rapid City Journal) levels, but there was a striking lack of news  coverage at the regional and local level.  The occupation of the Trail  of Broken Treaties grabbed national headlines to a much greater extent  than local news outlets.  I compiled sources by researching online  digital repositories like ProQuest and hunted down microfilm for  anything not digitized.

The next task once materials were located was the longest process in  the digital project: the transcription and mark-up of the media reports  and editorials.  The process used encoding called eXtensible Markup  Language (XML), an encoding standard designed for sharing and  structuring data on the web that allows users to define mark-up  elements.  XML allowed me to define elements behind newspaper articles  and preserve the original text.  For example, a section of one of the  transcribed newspapers might be encoded:

{{< highlight xml >}}
<p><name type="person" key="Adams, Hank">Adams</name> does not dismiss as unimportant the $2 million damage to the BIA building, but he does not like to dwell on it.  He largely regrets it because the publicity &quot;has diverted attention&quot; from the original purpose of the protest, which was to urge changes in the handling of Indian affairs.</p>

<p>He takes the same stance regarding criminal records of some of the movement's leaders.</p>
                
<p>(Newspaper clippings in Minneapolis indicate that <name type="person" key="Bellecourt, Vernon">Vernon Bellecourt</name> was convicted of a tavern holdup in <name type="place" key="Terre Haute, Indiana" reg="Terre Haute, Indiana">Terre Haute, Ind.</name>, in 1951, and of a holdup in <name type="place" reg="St. Paul, Minnesota" key="St. Paul Minnesota">St. Paul</name> as a juvenile.  <name type="person" key="Bellecourt, Clyde">Clyde Bellecourt</name> and <name type="person" key="Banks, Dennis">Banks</name> have been arrested several times in connection with protests.)</p>
{{< /highlight >}}

In the above example, elements in the primary text received tags that  are invisible to the reader of a document on the project site, but are  useful in making the text machine-readable.  Any editorial decisions for  tagging elements has little impact on the text itself.  In this case,  &lt;p&gt; tags define paragraphs, &lt;name&gt; tags define specific  people and places, and so forth.

XML also allows digital historians to develop sustainable projects  for the future.  Since the tags within XML documents are “intelligent,”  both machines and humans can easily identify markup text.  Furthermore,  any changes in the design of the site displaying XML documents can  easily maintain the integrity of encoded material since XML is displayed  through stylesheets.  Digital resources, suggests Abby Smith, are best  “facilitating access to information and weakest when assigned the  traditional library responsibility of preservation.”  “The real  challenge,” she continues, “is how to make those analog materials more  accessible using the powerful tool of digital technology.”  She raises  important concerns about digital collections, arguing that digitizing  information should not displace analog.  Technology can become obsolete  and render older versions of digital resources inaccessible or, at the  least, cumbersome to access.  However, this should not discourage  historians from entering the digital realm.  Newer technologies and  languages have made storing data easier, but digital historians should  think about the available technology when developing their projects to  ensure a structured and sustainable project.

With a corpus of digitized newspaper articles, next came the process  of integrating digital tools that can assist historians in analyzing  material.  Digital technologies are not an end in and of themselves but  rather a method for querying and analyzing material in new ways.  Since I  was analyzing language I turned to texual analysis tools, specifically  TokenX, a powerful textual analysis tool developed by Brian  Pytlik-Zillig at the Center for Digital Research at the University of  Nebraska-Lincoln.  I also used a free, web-based service called Wordle  that allowed me to generate word clouds from my digitized newspapers.   Developing visual representations of the newspaper articles allows  historians to spot themes in text that might otherwise be hidden.

The word clouds appeared to reveal a focus on Indians, the BIA  building, and the federal government far more than they focus on what  the American Indian activists have to say or why they are leading a  demonstration.  The issues that AIM wanted to call attention to during  the demonstration, such as treaty rights or tribal soverengty, are lost  in a narrative more interested in the federal response.  The word cloud  itself reveals little without interpretation.  The question of why the  press focused on the building and government rather than the purpose of  the Trail led to my argument that the press shaped its narrative around  the issues of law and order and a discussion of American Indian  politics.  Tools like word clouds help to highlight the frequency of  language in text, a process impossible (or nearly so) to achieve in  print, and reveal ways we can visualize narratives and analyze their  significance.

Using digital tools comes with a word of warning.  The integration of  tools and visualizations must convey insights into the research.   Though experimenting with visualizations and tools can be useful,  integrating these into digital scholarship simply for the sake of having  visualizations without purpose contributes little to the scholarship.   No matter how much energy is poured into the design of a digital  project, it means nothing if quality content and argument are not  foregrounded.

Moving scholarship to the networked environment of the web opens our  work to wider audiences–perhaps much wider audiences than historical  monographs.  More and more people turn to the web for information, and  thus far the profession has been left behind in producing the history  web.  The web sends our information everywhere to engage many and wide  audiences.  Furthermore, the historical record is open to all and the  work of the historian becomes transparent.  Readers can probe the  sources for themselves or even generate their own projects from prior  work, building a larger network of historical data and interpretation on  specific people, themes, or events.  “The goal for historians working  in the new digital medium needs to be to make the computer technology  transparent,” writes William G. Thomas, “and to allow the reader to  focus his or her whole attention on the ‘world’ that the historian has  opened up for investigation, interpretation, inquiry, and analysis.”

An issue historians must confront in the digital realm is what being  an author in this medium will look like.  Readers of online material do  not approach websites the same way they approach books.  Sustained  reading is not quite possible with the current technology of the  computer screen.  Chunking text or formatting text for “info-snacking”  may be the models best suited for online reading.  Furthermore, in one  of the large themes of digital history, readers will want to interact  with the text.  Hypertext can weave together several aspects of a site,  allowing readers to freely roam through projects.  The nonlinear  approach to history allows readers to move through narratives in  unrestraining ways.  “History,” notes Orville Vernon Burton, “similar to  all disciplines, is badly in need of models beyond the monograph for  the demonstration of excellence, and where the scholarship itself is in  need of new genres and new strategies for reaching new audiences.”

Despite its advantages, digital history has issues that historians  must consider.  Because the profession has not embraced the medium as  serious scholarship, no quality controls, peer review, or promotion and  tenure incentives exist for those doing digital history.  This  reluctance by the profesion translates to historians who will not  consider digital technologies as part of their work because they remain  unsure how it will affect their careers.  By failing to engage the  history web, however, others outside the profession will define what  constitutes “good” history.  The fear and misgivings are understandable  (especially given the large failures of combining computing technologies  and history under cliometrics) but the goal of digital history is not  to upend the profession.  We can still produce what the profession  respects the most (the book) while also producing digital scholarship.   The future is where the two co-exist.

The early forms of digital history were  software packages distributed to libraries and universities, digitized  historical material sitting in online archives, or material used in  courses. Roy Rosenzweig’s 1993 CD-ROM Who Built America? combined  images, text, and audio files to produce an interactive narrative. Even  the early conception for the Valley of the Shadow Project was meant for  CD-ROM distribution until the release of the Mosaic web browser in 1993.  The Library of Congress started offering online exhibits in 1992 with  Select Civil War Photographs in 1992. Other forms of the early history  web included digitized course material and syllubi.

These projects were interactive,  though not “participatory” in the way William Thomas identified.  The  dynamic, networked, participatory technologies available on the web  today have transformed how scholars can disseminate scholarship  digitally. Web 2.0 is changing this. We have gone beyond the static  representations of the past represented in collections of images or the  pasting of text onto a screen to the more dynamic and active  capabilities of the web. Rather than guide readers through the framework  of a print narrative, users can freely explore projects to experience a  historical argument. Material in digital projects can be manipulated  and experimented with to build their own connections between sources and  the argument.

Web 2.0 technologies make this  easier. Rather than lead them through a narrative, users can be  presented with a host of interpretive elements that get at the  historical question under investigation. Text can be mined for  information, hypertext makes associations among elements, and material  can be annotated and queried (such as tagging elements) in an effort to  understand how everything fits together. Historians might define the  parameters of their projects but users have the ability to contribute to  knowledge production. The success of Wikipedia is a great example.  People have a thirst for free and accessible information and relish the  opportunity to contribute what they know or think about topics, a  process that Steven Mintz called “active learning.”  Digital history is  not only important for the audience, but for the scholar. Overtime  projects will change due to the impermanence of the medium. Digital  projects become open access platforms constantly undergoing changes and  modifications as research is built upon and interpretations shift and  transform.

Thomas writes that digital history is  “a process, an active, spatial, virtual-reality encounter with the  past.  I see my project embracing certain threads of that definition but  still not fully addressing narrative or allowing users the full ability  to query or manipulate material in the digital medium. My project sits  between the archival approach but does not fully embrace certain Web 2.0  technologies that allow users full interaction with material. TokenX  would serve a greater purpose than Wordle in allowing users to query  primary sources. My experiments with hypertext and using popup dialogues  I believe get at an interactive narrative that allows users to draw  associations or retrieve contextual information about topics I bring up.  However, I’m still expending mental energy on what narrative and  scholarship should look like in this environment. My interpretive  elements such as Wordle and Timeline allow users to visualize text and  the dissemination of information, but I would be more pleased if users  could add or subtract elements at their whim; for instance, having the  ability to add or remove newspaper articles, words, or phrases from my  word clouds. However, the XML markup of newspaper articles are fully  available and open for use. I’m also trying to get a search engine that  allows users to parse documents for specific keywords or phrases.

Historians must take an active role  in developing and defining digital history. Open access and open source  scholarship allows historians to connect with new and wider audiences.  Given the problems facing the publishing industry, historical  scholarship must find something beyond the monograph in order to present  knowledge. People increasingly turn to the web for information and  often go no further. If historians are concerned about the low quality  of historical information online, then they need to take an active role  in improving the quality or it will be left to others outside the  historical profession. Technological barriers, wariness about using  technology, and ideas of Cliometrics 2.0 has restricted the number of  historians engaging digital technology. The result, as Ed Ayers points  out, is that no large-scale project like the Valley of the Shadow has  emerged in the last ten years.

There are also problems of acceptance  of digital scholarship as serious scholarship within the profession.  For young scholars, the message from the profession seems to be that it  is best to ignore digital scholarship because it will not factor into a  professional career. Our task should be not only to help define the  history web, but to convince others in the profession that scholarship  and interpretation stands at the center of digital projects; they’re not  merely vehicles for entertainment, but an efficient medium for  presenting knowledge, sources, interpretation, and making associations.  History seems especially suited for digital technologies, and historians  should embrace the medium to pioneer new methods of conveying  knowledge, arguments, and interpretations.
