---
title: The Tension of Generative AI
date: 2026-03-17
draft: true
lede: There are tasks it's genuinely good at, and many tasks it's very bad at.
tags: []
---
I think there's an inherent tension currently in the discourses around generative AI---on a "is this useful" level, but lets also acknowledge the deep ethical and environmental issues here too. On the one hand, it's very, very good at some things if you are providing the experience and expertise necessary to know what you're asking it to do (and, thus, can see what it's getting wrong). I think this has been true since generative systems started taking off. But I cannot deny that, on the digital history side of things, these tools are remarkable.

1. They allow a degree of testing or experimentation that would otherwise be tedious or slow. Sometimes I want to know what a layout change will do to a website or if I could test out a visualization of data, and within five minutes I can know the answer versus the hour or more it would take me to do the same. 
2. With the right parameters---that is, the right description of the thing I'm trying to design or envision---giving Claude Code a prompt about what I want it to create means I can make things very quickly. There are advantages to that: I know, pretty fast, whether my idea or my design will work for the problems I'm trying to solve. There's still a lot of back and forth conversation between me and Claude, even if I'm not writing every line of code. This still requires expertise and thinking.
3. Up until about three or four months ago I was still telling people that a generative AI could not create an entire piece of software from start to finish on it's own. That's not true anymore. 
4. There's a great ability to produce slop: slop software, slop websites, slop spam, slop writing. But you don't *have* to. There are ways these tools are useful, intellectual vigorous, and interesting. That is, *craft* still matters even with these tools. 
5. Is some of the code it produces fairly boilerplate? Sure, but so is the solution I went and found on Stack Overflow.

The other tension, of course, is there are things generative AI is terrible for or terrible at. 

1. While it's ability to write whole essays with some modicum of research has dramatically improved, that writing still isn't particularly good. And, as I've argued, it's [useless](/2025/12/22/generative-ai-and-the-work-of-history/).
2. In education, generative systems sand down the edges of struggle and productive friction much to the detriment of our students but also to ourselves. We shouldn't want things to be frictionless, especially in research or knowledge work. Our purpose is to think deeply, research and weigh evidence, identify the silences in the sources we work from, and do the physical work in the archives. I believe that is true from the first year undergraduate to the published writer working on their next book. 
3. The systems are used for cheating, for misleading, for harassing, for attacking. Again, see point 4 above: they don't have to be used this way, but they are and we need better legislative and judicial guardrails around this stuff.
4. These systems are built on stolen content and require land and water in ways that should give people great pause.

I don't know how to reconcile all of this yet, personally. I'm not fully convinced these systems are here for the long term---they're burning through cash and still remain unprofitable, propped up only through venture capital funding or defense contracts ([sounds like another place I know](/publications/silicon-valley/)). It's entirely plausible we'll see the big players (Anthropic, Google, OpenAI, and so forth) unable to keep up with this. But, the underlying mathematics, machine learning, algorithms, and methods feel like they're likely to stick around even if the massive compute currently required for them end up popping what feels like a bubble.[^1]

[^1]: If I dare venture a guess: while the current state of the art in LLMs requires massive servers to work efficiently, I would also wager these things will start to shrink down and begin working just as well on an individual computer, phone, tablet, or whatever our next digital device is. That might be a ways off yet, but I would not be surprised if we get there. 

But there's an absolutism in generative AI discourse, at least online: it's either the worst thing unleashed on the world, or the best thing since the dawn of the Internet. I completely understand those who want nothing to do with this: for example, I'll admit I don't spend a lot of time in the classroom, and I cannot imagine what it's been like trying to build assignments and exams that need to be AI-proof. But I also cannot deny that it has been a good thing for me: in the work I want to do in digital history, generative AI has been a remarkable thing. I remarked to a friend recently that it felt like 2011 to me again: I'm blogging again, building little digital research projects, and listening to tech podcasts like I'm back in grad school. Perhaps it's a sense of freeing up my time: as I've gotten older and life events have happened, it has necessarily constrained the time I can invest into building a digital project or experiment with new technology. But I also just think these systems have gotten genuinely *exciting*, and coupled with my expertise in building things for the Internet it has opened up new ways for me to do this work.

That said, if this note hasn't already made it clear I'm pretty limited in how I use these systems. Never, ever, do they influence my writing. I don't use them to write, I don't use them for editing, I don't use them for research. I'm not a Claude Cowork user. I don't even really bounce ideas off Claude or Gemini. I've been experimenting with transcribing historical documents with generative AI, but even then I'm not asking it for analysis---that's for me to do, because I need to read and understand and sit with these sources. There's no shortcut to that. In other words, most of my engagement with generative AI is in web development where I feel it has made a tremendous impact.